Document HTTP gateway (#131)
LangStream/documentation: building-applications/api-gateways/http.md

# HTTP

You connect to a gateway via standard HTTP 1.1. While connecting to a gateway, the path holds pointers to the type of gateway, the tenant, the application id, and the gateway name.

The URL structure is http://\<control-plane-domain>:\<api-gateway-port>/api/gateways/\<gateway-type>/\<tenant-name>/\<application-id>/\<gateway-id>.

Authentication (`credentials,test-credentials`), options (`option:`) and parameters (`param:`) are expected to be in the query string. HTTP headers are ignored by the API Gateway service.

## Produce messages

> In order to produce messages via HTTP, you have to configure a `produce` gateway:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To produce messages via HTTP, configure a `produce` gateway:
```

```yaml

gateways:
  - id: "user-input"
    type: produce
    topic: "questions-topic"
    parameters:
    - sessionId
```

> Then you can use whathever HTTP client you prefer to connect. This is the example with Curl:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once a gateway is configured, you can use whatever HTTP client you prefer to connect. This is an example with Curl:
```

```bash
curl -X POST --body '{"value": "hello"}' "http://localhost:8091/api/gateways/produce/my-tenant/my-app/user-input?param:sessionId=12543yusi1"
```

You can also use the LangStream CLI:

```bash
langstream gateway produce my-app user-input --protocol http -v '{"value": "hello"}' -p sessionId=12543yusi1
```

> ## Produce messages and await for a message

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Produce messages and wait for a message
```

> In order to produce messages via HTTP and await for a message, you have to configure a `service` gateway:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To produce messages via HTTP and wait for a message, configure a `service` gateway:
```

```yaml

gateways:
  - id: "user-input-await"
    type: service
    parameters:
    - sessionId
    service-options:
        input-topic: inputs
        output-topic: results
```

> Then you can use whathever HTTP client you prefer to connect. This is the example with Curl:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once a gateway is configured, you can use whatever HTTP client you prefer to connect. This is an example with Curl:
```

```bash
curl -X POST --body '{"value": "hello"}' "http://localhost:8091/api/gateways/service/my-tenant/my-app/user-input-await"
```

> The timeout of the wait is the TCP timeout of the connection, usually 30 seconds (may vary depending on the http client).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The timeout of the wait is the TCP timeout of the connection, which is usually 30 seconds (may vary depending on the http client).
```

## Proxy service agent requests

> In order to proxy requests to a specific `service` agent via HTTP, you have to configure a `service` gateway:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To proxy requests to a specific `service` agent via HTTP, configure a `service` gateway:
```

```yaml
gateways:
  - id: "my-service"
    type: service
    parameters:
    - sessionId
    service-options:
        agent-id: my-service-agent
     
```

A service agent might look like this in the pipeline configuration: 
```yaml
pipeline:
  - name: "Start my service"
    id: my-service-agent
    type: "python-service"
    configuration:
      className: example.ChatBotService
```

> Then you can use whathever HTTP client you prefer to connect. This is the example with Curl:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once a gateway is configured, you can use whatever HTTP client you prefer to connect. This is an example with Curl:
```

```bash
curl -X POST \
    --body '{"value": "hello"}' \
    --H 'Authorization: Bearer XXX' \
    "http://localhost:8091/api/gateways/service/my-tenant/my-app/my-service/the/custom/path?service-param-1=yes"
```

> The final part of the URL, query string, HTTP method and headers will be sent to the service agent.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The final part of the URL, query string, HTTP method, and headers will be sent to the service agent.
```

> POST, GET, DELETE and PUT are all supported.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

In the above case, the agent service will receive an equivalent request of:

```
curl -X POST \
    --body '{"value": "hello"}' \
    --H 'Authorization: Bearer XXX' \
    "http://localhost:8000/the/custom/path?service-param-1=yes"
```

> Exceptionally, the `credentials`, `test-credentials`, `option:xx`, `param:xx` are stripped out from the routed requests.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `credentials`, `test-credentials`, `option:xx`, `param:xx` are stripped out from the routed requests.
```

> Note that if the gateway has the authentication enabled, it will be performed as for other gateways.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the gateway has authentication enabled, it will be performed as for other gateways.
```

> Leveraging the API gateway to expose your service, automatically covers aspects like authentication, HTTPS, high-availability and scalability out of the box. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
POST, GET, DELETE and PUT are all supported.

Leveraging the API gateway to expose your service solves authentication, HTTPS, high-availability, and scalability out of the box. 
```
